README.rst, before:

MAD-X debian package
--------------------

This repository contains templates needed to create a ``libmadx-dev``
ubuntu source package for a shared library installation of MAD-X_. The
suffix ``-dev`` indicates that the package also contains all necessary
files to link against the shared library.

.. _MAD-X: http://cern.ch/mad


Disclaimer
==========

This is an unofficial build of MAD-X that is not supported by CERN, i.e. in
case of problems you will not get help there.


Usage
=====

The result is uploaded to a personal package archive (PPA) `on launchpad`_
which builds a binary (.deb) package from it. If you are running ubuntu,
you can use this PPA as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

    # add repository:
    sudo add-apt-repository ppa:coldfix/madx

    # install library:
    sudo apt-get install libmadx-dev

The main purpose of this PPA is to speed up testing of cpymad_ on Travis_.
Therefore, only the default `Travis CI environment`_ is supported for now,
i.e. ubuntu 12.04 LTS 64bit (precise pangolin).

Email me if you want to use this package on another version of ubuntu.

.. _on launchpad: https://launchpad.net/~coldfix/+archive/ubuntu/madx/
.. _cpymad: https://github.com/hibtc/cpymad
.. _Travis: https://travis-ci.org/hibtc/cpymad
.. _Travis CI environment: http://docs.travis-ci.com/user/ci-environment/#CI-environment-OS


Updating
========

This section contains information for anyone (Hi, to you too, *future-me*!)
who wants to create their own MAD-X package or update this package to a
newer MAD-X version. This assumes you are running on a reasonably
up-to-date version of ubuntu.


Setup environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To get going, first install packaging tools:

.. code-block:: bash

    # technical requirements:
    sudo apt-get install build-essential devscripts debhelper

    # OR if you don't care about lots installed packages that are
    # unnecessary at this point but may come in handy later, you can just
    # do the following:
    sudo apt-get install packaging-dev

Configure your name and email to be used for packaging in your ``~/.bashrc``:

.. code-block:: bash

    export DEBEMAIL=t_glaessle@gmx.de
    export DEBFULLNAME="Thomas Gläßle"

Then reload the file (``source ~/.bashrc``) or simply restart your terminal.


Update package
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now edit the contents of the ``debian/`` folder as well as the ``Makefile``
according to your needs. In particular the following files need to be updated:

- ``debian/changelog``: add package revision via ``dch -v VERSION``, see
  `Version numbers`_. Start with the latest targeted ubuntu release.

- ``Makefile``: update the ``COMMIT`` variable. It should usually be set to
  ``COMMIT=$(VERSION)`` unless doing a post-release.

Less frequently you may also need to change:

- ``debian/control``: dependencies, conflicts, description

- ``debian/rules``: build recipe: cmake parameters

From there on, proceed as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

    # make sure, there are no left-overs from previous attempts:
    make clean

    # download MAD-X and make source package:
    make

    # upload final source package:
    make upload

After uploading, add one entry at a time for all older supported ubuntu
versions via ``dch -v`` and ``make && make upload`` each time. The changelog
text for these entries should be ``* backport of version XXXX``.

Currently, the targeted ubuntu versions are::

    xenial (16.04)
    trusty (14.04)


Version numbers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The version format is assumed to be ``upstream_version-revision``, where
``upstream_version`` is the MAD-X version number and ``revision`` should be
formed as follows:

.. code-block:: none

    0~ppaX~ubuntuYY.MM

with the release date ``YY.MM`` of the targeted ubuntu distribution at the end.

Start ``X`` (in ``ppaX``) at 1 and increment on every new package revision of
the same upstream version.

For example, for the second revision of MAD-X 5.04.02, the full version targeted
on ubuntu 14.04 (trusty) is:

.. code-block:: none

    5.04.02-0~ppa1~ubuntu14.04

This format is the result of several iterations and careful consideration. It
allows to do post-releases (see Troubleshooting_) and correctly compares when
creating revisions or submitting packages for different ubuntu versions.


Troubleshooting
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When uploading a new package revision for the same upstream release, the
uploaded source tarball (``.orig.tar.gz``) must be exactly the same, or
else the upload will be rejected. Normally, this shouldn't happen. If it
does, however, the options are:

- add a ``+postN`` suffix in the ``upstream_version`` part and reupload.
  This is the preferred route if the previous tarball was corrupted, or
  if doing a post-release (i.e. a release on a later commit than the
  upstream release), the full version number becomes, e.g.::

    5.04.01+post1-0~ppa1~ubuntu14.04

- if the source tarball in the current directory is corrupted, instead
  redownload the source tarball from launchpad::

    make redownload


Low-level
~~~~~~~~~

The default make target is actually composed of two steps:

.. code-block:: bash

    # download and extract MAD-X into build/ subdirectory:
    make prepare

    # create the source archive:
    make makepkg

If there is need to things manually, I also want to mention these
lower-level commands:

.. code-block:: bash

    cd build/trusty/libmadx-dev-*

    # create source package and upload. `-sa` means force upload
    # the `.orig.tar.gz` file
    debuild -S -sa
    dput ppa:coldfix/madx ../libmadx-dev-*_source.changes

    # OR create and install .deb package
    debuild
    sudo dpkg -i ../libmadx-dev-*.deb


Resources
=========

Debian packaging is quite complicated. These are some of the resources that
helped creating this repository:

http://www.infodrom.org/Debian/doc/maint/Maintenance-pkgbuild.html

http://packaging.ubuntu.com/html/

https://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/maint-guide/

https://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/developers-reference/best-pkging-practices.html

https://wiki.debian.org/IntroDebianPackaging

http://developer.ubuntu.com/publish/apps/other-forms-of-submitting-apps/ppa/

http://askubuntu.com/questions/28562/how-do-i-create-a-ppa-for-a-working-program

Commit message:

Simplify version numbers again
I doubt there will be an official ubuntu package for madx, so I
don't care about the extra compatibility, and I prefer the simpler
visuals.

Besides, the last upload for trusty got rejected, because there
was already a newer revision online, and this will fix it.

README.rst, after:

MAD-X debian package
--------------------

This repository contains templates needed to create a ``libmadx-dev``
ubuntu source package for a shared library installation of MAD-X_. The
suffix ``-dev`` indicates that the package also contains all necessary
files to link against the shared library.

.. _MAD-X: http://cern.ch/mad


Disclaimer
==========

This is an unofficial build of MAD-X that is not supported by CERN, i.e. in
case of problems you will not get help there.


Usage
=====

The result is uploaded to a personal package archive (PPA) `on launchpad`_
which builds a binary (.deb) package from it. If you are running ubuntu,
you can use this PPA as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

    # add repository:
    sudo add-apt-repository ppa:coldfix/madx

    # install library:
    sudo apt-get install libmadx-dev

The main purpose of this PPA is to speed up testing of cpymad_ on Travis_.
Therefore, only the default `Travis CI environment`_ is supported for now,
i.e. ubuntu 12.04 LTS 64bit (precise pangolin).

Email me if you want to use this package on another version of ubuntu.

.. _on launchpad: https://launchpad.net/~coldfix/+archive/ubuntu/madx/
.. _cpymad: https://github.com/hibtc/cpymad
.. _Travis: https://travis-ci.org/hibtc/cpymad
.. _Travis CI environment: http://docs.travis-ci.com/user/ci-environment/#CI-environment-OS


Updating
========

This section contains information for anyone (Hi, to you too, *future-me*!)
who wants to create their own MAD-X package or update this package to a
newer MAD-X version. This assumes you are running on a reasonably
up-to-date version of ubuntu.


Setup environment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To get going, first install packaging tools:

.. code-block:: bash

    # technical requirements:
    sudo apt-get install build-essential devscripts debhelper

    # OR if you don't care about lots installed packages that are
    # unnecessary at this point but may come in handy later, you can just
    # do the following:
    sudo apt-get install packaging-dev

Configure your name and email to be used for packaging in your ``~/.bashrc``:

.. code-block:: bash

    export DEBEMAIL=t_glaessle@gmx.de
    export DEBFULLNAME="Thomas Gläßle"

Then reload the file (``source ~/.bashrc``) or simply restart your terminal.


Update package
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now edit the contents of the ``debian/`` folder as well as the ``Makefile``
according to your needs. In particular the following files need to be updated:

- ``debian/changelog``: add package revision via ``dch -v VERSION``, see
  `Version numbers`_. Start with the latest targeted ubuntu release.

- ``Makefile``: update the ``COMMIT`` variable. It should usually be set to
  ``COMMIT=$(VERSION)`` unless doing a post-release.

Less frequently you may also need to change:

- ``debian/control``: dependencies, conflicts, description

- ``debian/rules``: build recipe: cmake parameters

From there on, proceed as follows:

.. code-block:: bash

    # make sure, there are no left-overs from previous attempts:
    make clean

    # download MAD-X and make source package:
    make

    # upload final source package:
    make upload

After uploading, add one entry at a time for all older supported ubuntu
versions via ``dch -v`` and ``make && make upload`` each time. The changelog
text for these entries should be ``* backport of version XXXX``.

Currently, the targeted ubuntu versions are::

    xenial (16.04)
    trusty (14.04)


Version numbers
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The version format is assumed to be ``upstream_version-revision``, where
``upstream_version`` is the MAD-X version number and ``revision`` should be
formed as follows:

.. code-block:: none

    X~ubuntuYY.MM

Start ``X`` at 1 and increment on every new package revision of the same upstream
version. ``YY.MM`` is the release date of the targeted ubuntu distribution.

For example, for the second revision of MAD-X 5.04.02, the full version targeted
on ubuntu 14.04 (trusty) is:

.. code-block:: none

    5.04.02-2~ubuntu14.04

This format is the result of several iterations and careful consideration. It
allows to do post-releases (see Troubleshooting_) and correctly compares when
creating revisions or submitting packages for different ubuntu versions.

See Version_ on how debian version numbers are formed.

.. _Version: https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/ch-controlfields.html#version


Troubleshooting
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When uploading a new package revision for the same upstream release, the
uploaded source tarball (``.orig.tar.gz``) must be exactly the same, or
else the upload will be rejected. Normally, this shouldn't happen. If it
does, however, the options are:

- add a ``+postN`` suffix in the ``upstream_version`` part and reupload.
  This is the preferred route if the previous tarball was corrupted, or
  if doing a post-release (i.e. a release on a later commit than the
  upstream release), the full version number becomes, e.g.::

    5.04.01+post1-1~ubuntu14.04

- if the source tarball in the current directory is corrupted, instead
  redownload the source tarball from launchpad::

    make redownload


Low-level
~~~~~~~~~

The default make target is actually composed of two steps:

.. code-block:: bash

    # download and extract MAD-X into build/ subdirectory:
    make prepare

    # create the source archive:
    make makepkg

If there is need to things manually, I also want to mention these
lower-level commands:

.. code-block:: bash

    cd build/trusty/libmadx-dev-*

    # create source package and upload. `-sa` means force upload
    # the `.orig.tar.gz` file
    debuild -S -sa
    dput ppa:coldfix/madx ../libmadx-dev-*_source.changes

    # OR create and install .deb package
    debuild
    sudo dpkg -i ../libmadx-dev-*.deb


Resources
=========

Debian packaging is quite complicated. These are some of the resources that
helped creating this repository:

http://www.infodrom.org/Debian/doc/maint/Maintenance-pkgbuild.html

http://packaging.ubuntu.com/html/

https://www.debian.org/doc/debian-policy/

https://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/maint-guide/

https://www.debian.org/doc/manuals/developers-reference/best-pkging-practices.html

https://wiki.debian.org/IntroDebianPackaging

http://developer.ubuntu.com/publish/apps/other-forms-of-submitting-apps/ppa/

http://askubuntu.com/questions/28562/how-do-i-create-a-ppa-for-a-working-program
